[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the IBM Podcast Network.
[Amit Varma]: Let me begin the show with a confession.
[Amit Varma]: I am God.
[Amit Varma]: Yes, you heard me right.
[Amit Varma]: I am the Almighty God.
[Amit Varma]: Now, it might seem kind of contradictory that I'm also an atheist,
[Amit Varma]: but that's what happens when you lack self-belief.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, let me tell you about what happened yesterday morning.
[Amit Varma]: It was monthly admission day.
[Amit Varma]: That day in the month when I admit dead souls into heaven.
[Amit Varma]: So, I was sitting at the gates of St. Peter's
[Amit Varma]: and as the applicants trooped past me,
[Amit Varma]: I gazed into their souls to determine if they were worthy of admission.
[Amit Varma]: Had they been defenders of freedom all their lives?
[Amit Varma]: Had they respected the personal autonomy of others?
[Amit Varma]: Had they been kind and empathetic to their fellow humans?
[Amit Varma]: Did they like golden fried prawns?
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, so I chose a few thousand souls and they all gathered before me.
[Amit Varma]: I said to them,
[Amit Varma]: you will now get the rewards for your earthly good deeds.
[Amit Varma]: You can have whatever your heart desires.
[Amit Varma]: Who here wants an eternity of sensual pleasures?
[Amit Varma]: The crowd was quiet.
[Amit Varma]: No one stepped forward.
[Amit Varma]: I tried again.
[Amit Varma]: Who here wants to lie on a comfy divan
[Amit Varma]: with slaves in silk harem pants holding grapes above their face?
[Amit Varma]: No one volunteered.
[Amit Varma]: Who wants to listen to some divine music?
[Amit Varma]: Who wants to watch movies and eat seafood platters all day?
[Amit Varma]: Who wants to do adventure sports without risk of death
[Amit Varma]: for you're already dead, ha ha ha!
[Amit Varma]: Who wants to watch CCTV footage from any place on earth?
[Amit Varma]: Silence.
[Amit Varma]: No one seemed to want any of these things.
[Amit Varma]: I was bemused.
[Amit Varma]: I asked them,
[Amit Varma]: so what the hell do you want?
[Amit Varma]: One of them shouted,
[Amit Varma]: we want jobs.
[Amit Varma]: Then all of them shouted in chorus,
[Amit Varma]: we want jobs, we want jobs, we want jobs.
[Amit Varma]: My mouth was open in divine astonishment.
[Amit Varma]: Finally, the first guy said to me,
[Amit Varma]: we want jobs.
[Amit Varma]: Jobs is our idea of heaven.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: This episode follows on from last week's episode
[Amit Varma]: in which I discussed the Right to Education Act
[Amit Varma]: with my guest, Vivek Kaul.
[Amit Varma]: We ended the episode when Vivek pointed out
[Amit Varma]: that one of the unseen effects of our dismal education system
[Amit Varma]: was that so many people were simply unqualified for the job market.
[Amit Varma]: Because there was a demand-supply mismatch at the level of education,
[Amit Varma]: there was also a demand-supply mismatch at the level of jobs.
[Amit Varma]: Both Vivek and I feel that India is headed for a jobs crisis.
[Amit Varma]: This jobs crisis is the unseen effect of decades of bad policy.
[Amit Varma]: Our education system is messed up,
[Amit Varma]: our labor laws are horrible,
[Amit Varma]: the license in Inspector Raj has crippled India,
[Amit Varma]: and our agricultural policies have trapped our farmers
[Amit Varma]: in a vicious cycle of continuing poverty.
[Amit Varma]: To talk more about this jobs crisis,
[Amit Varma]: I've got Vivek back with me in the studio.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back, Vivek.
[Guest]: Thanks for having me over again.
[Guest]: One of my friends, Varun Mitra, who was on the show,
[Amit Varma]: a few weeks ago, often quotes Naipaul
[Amit Varma]: and talks about the million mutinies that are brewing in India.
[Amit Varma]: And some of these recent mutinies that we've seen
[Amit Varma]: are like the Jat agitation in Haryana,
[Amit Varma]: the Patidar agitation in Gujarat,
[Amit Varma]: and all of them revolve around the question of jobs,
[Amit Varma]: a subject which you've studied very deeply and are very worried about.
[Amit Varma]: Can you expound on that a bit?
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Guest]: So, you know, the funny thing is that
[Guest]: most of these job agitations
[Guest]: are centred around people who come from landowning castes.
[Guest]: So, if you look at Jats in Haryana,
[Guest]: or you look at the Patidar Patels in Gujarat,
[Guest]: or the Marathas who have been having these silent rallies
[Guest]: all across Maharashtra, or the Kapus in Andhra Pradesh,
[Guest]: they are landowning castes.
[Guest]: So, the point is that they never really needed jobs up until now.
[Guest]: Now, what has happened is that
[Guest]: over a period of time, the average landholding of a farmer
[Guest]: in India has come down dramatically.
[Guest]: And as per the agriculture census of 2010-11,
[Guest]: which is the latest data that we have,
[Guest]: it's come down to around 1.1 hectare.
[Guest]: And they've come down essentially because families are growing.
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, every generation the land gets divided.
[Guest]: You know, there is only so much of land going around.
[Guest]: And so, the land keeps getting smaller and smaller.
[Guest]: And, you know, as the land keeps getting smaller and smaller,
[Guest]: the economies of scale keep going out of the window.
[Guest]: So, farming is not as lucrative for them as it used to be.
[Guest]: So, they need jobs.
[Guest]: The problem, as we discussed in the last episode,
[Guest]: is that the educational outcomes of people
[Guest]: who have been through the Indian schooling system,
[Guest]: are really not up to the mark.
[Guest]: And they want government jobs.
[Guest]: So, the irony again is that, you know,
[Guest]: the government jobs are going up at a very, very small pace.
[Guest]: I mean, in case of many, many, in many states,
[Guest]: the government jobs may have actually come down.
[Guest]: In one particular state that I studied in the book was Haryana.
[Guest]: And in case of Haryana, the rate of, you know, job acceleration
[Guest]: at the Haryana government level has been very, very slow.
[Guest]: So, the funny thing is that, you know,
[Guest]: I really don't know as to why are they asking for a government reservation
[Guest]: because the government doesn't really create jobs anymore.
[Amit Varma]: So, give me a sense of the scale of the problem.
[Amit Varma]: Like, this demographic dividend that we speak of, is it really a dividend?
[Guest]: What kind of...
[Guest]: Yes. So, you know, there is a lot of research around this.
[Guest]: And essentially, the researchers try and estimate as to
[Guest]: you know, the number of new individuals entering the workforce every month.
[Guest]: And the estimates vary.
[Guest]: But on an average, they all come to, you know,
[Guest]: something around 1 million individuals entering the workforce every month,
[Guest]: which is around 1.2 crore every year,
[Guest]: which is around half the population of Australia.
[Guest]: Now, in the traditional sense of the term, you know,
[Guest]: what does demographic dividend mean?
[Guest]: It essentially means that when your working population,
[Guest]: working age population is growing at a faster rate than your overall population,
[Guest]: then the country tends to benefit.
[Guest]: Because as these guys get jobs and, you know,
[Guest]: they spend, you know, they earn money and they spend that money,
[Guest]: the economy tends to grow at a much faster rate than it did in the past.
[Guest]: So, there are examples of this demographic dividend happening
[Guest]: all over the world, including China.
[Guest]: But then there are other examples in the Middle East
[Guest]: where the demographic dividend did not turn out to be a demographic dividend.
[Guest]: You know, in India, the way we are currently going,
[Guest]: there are not enough jobs being created
[Guest]: for the 1.2 crore individuals who are entering the workforce every year.
[Guest]: So, there is a supply problem.
[Guest]: There is also a problem at the level of people who are entering the workforce
[Guest]: in the sense that their learning outcomes, their educational outcomes are really not in place.
[Guest]: I mean, as we discussed in the last episode,
[Guest]: you know, people can't do basic reading, basic writing.
[Guest]: And an average Indian is educated only until the primary school level.
[Guest]: Now, which is not in this day and age,
[Guest]: which is, you know, it's very difficult to be a primary school,
[Guest]: pass out and find something of a proper job.
[Amit Varma]: So, the tragedy of so many people coming into the workforce
[Amit Varma]: and those jobs simply not being there
[Amit Varma]: is really the unseen effect of a number of different policies
[Amit Varma]: which have, you know, perpetuated themselves over the decades.
[Amit Varma]: One of them, of course, is education.
[Amit Varma]: There is a mismatch at a fundamental level
[Amit Varma]: between the kind of education that people want or need
[Amit Varma]: and the kind of education which the state
[Amit Varma]: in a supply-led, top-down kind of wisdom actually ends up providing.
[Amit Varma]: And that creates a sort of a massive mismatch.
[Amit Varma]: What would you say are the other huge causes
[Amit Varma]: for those jobs simply not being there?
[Guest]: Okay. See, over the last few years,
[Guest]: what has happened is that, you know,
[Guest]: the Indian corporates have been heavily leveraged
[Guest]: and they've taken on a lot of loans from banks
[Guest]: and are no longer in a position to repay.
[Guest]: And given that, they're not in a position to expand.
[Guest]: So, when you're not in a position to expand,
[Guest]: you know, you're not really creating jobs.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at the rate of investment
[Guest]: in the Indian economy, it has fallen dramatically
[Guest]: over the last five years.
[Amit Varma]: And what would you say are the fundamental causes for this?
[Guest]: So, one is, as I said, that, you know,
[Guest]: there is already, as far as industries are concerned,
[Guest]: they already have enough capacity.
[Guest]: That capacity in itself is not being utilized.
[Guest]: The second thing is that, you know, labor laws in India
[Guest]: are extremely screwed up.
[Guest]: So, anyone, you know, who wants to expand thinks twice.
[Guest]: So, if you compare, you know, India with China,
[Guest]: I mean, I don't have specific numbers,
[Guest]: I don't remember specific numbers right now,
[Guest]: but India has many more small industries
[Guest]: whereas China has mid-level and larger industries.
[Guest]: And the small industries in India continue to remain small
[Guest]: because it is unviable for them to grow bigger.
[Guest]: You know, the moment they grow any bigger,
[Guest]: the law of the land catches up with them
[Guest]: and they have to follow, you know, all these labor laws
[Guest]: and a lot of other laws, which makes it very, very difficult
[Guest]: for them to continue to be viable.
[Guest]: And this is not something that, you know, I'm making up.
[Guest]: Even the National Manufacturing Policy of 2011,
[Guest]: which ultimately was copied and became the Make in India thing,
[Guest]: elaborates on it in great detail.
[Guest]: So, this is, you know, labor laws
[Guest]: and the fact that corporates are heavily leveraged
[Guest]: is, you know, one thing which is essentially
[Guest]: holding back capacity expansion.
[Guest]: Two things actually, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So, at a policy level, let's say you're sitting right now in the PMO
[Amit Varma]: and Modiji calls you into the office for a meeting
[Amit Varma]: and he says, Vivek, I've heard your podcast,
[Amit Varma]: I've read your book, amazingly insightful.
[Amit Varma]: What should I do?
[Amit Varma]: These are the jobs that the nation needs.
[Amit Varma]: If we are to make something of a demographic dividend,
[Amit Varma]: otherwise it will be…
[Guest]: So, that's a, you know, that's a very long answer.
[Guest]: I mean, I can give you a long answer, I can't give you a short answer.
[Amit Varma]: Give me a long answer, let's go.
[Guest]: So, you know, as we were talking before the podcast,
[Guest]: you know, I mean, and as I have repeated through the last two podcasts,
[Guest]: you know, most of the Indians coming out through the education system
[Guest]: are not really properly educated.
[Guest]: So, their educational outcomes are not in place
[Guest]: and given that, the jobs that they can do are essentially,
[Guest]: you know, low-skilled, what we call low-skilled jobs.
[Guest]: Typically, you know, when people move away from agriculture into other jobs,
[Guest]: they move into construction jobs.
[Guest]: Now, if you look at construction,
[Guest]: construction jobs essentially get created at, you know, three levels.
[Guest]: One is when corporates expand, which isn't happening right now.
[Guest]: Two is when the government tries and builds physical infrastructure,
[Guest]: which is happening right now.
[Guest]: But then, you know, the government has a limitation
[Guest]: on the amount of money that it can spend in any given year.
[Guest]: The third thing is real estate.
[Guest]: Now, this is where, you know, things can change
[Guest]: and India's so-called demographic dividend can find jobs
[Guest]: despite the fact that they are not very well-educated
[Guest]: because real estate does create a lot of low-end jobs.
[Guest]: The problem is that in the top, you know, in the biggest eight cities in India,
[Guest]: which is where the real estate market really is,
[Guest]: the demand for homes is simply not there.
[Guest]: And the reason for that lies in the fact that prices have reached a level
[Guest]: where people simply can't buy.
[Guest]: So, for real estate demand to pick up, prices need to fall.
[Guest]: And when prices will fall, then, you know, demand will pick up
[Guest]: and then construction activity will pick up
[Guest]: and then all these people, you know, not all, but, you know,
[Guest]: a significant portion of the people entering the workforce will find lower-level jobs.
[Guest]: Now, the question is why are real estate prices not falling?
[Guest]: You know, this is something that everybody keeps talking about.
[Guest]: And, you know, a simple as well as a complicated answer for it
[Guest]: is the fact that a lot of real estate is essentially run in the black economy.
[Guest]: Now, you know, why does a builder want you to pay a certain portion
[Guest]: of the money that you pay him in black?
[Guest]: You know, I mean, let's say you're an honest taxpayer
[Guest]: and when you're buying a home to live in,
[Guest]: when you pay a builder in cash, you're converting your white money into black.
[Guest]: But why is the builder asking for that money in cash?
[Guest]: I mean, obviously, you know, a simple answer is that
[Guest]: he does not want to pay tax on it. Fair enough.
[Guest]: But there are other answers as well.
[Guest]: Now, he needs that cash because he needs to, one, pay his suppliers in cash.
[Guest]: Two, he needs to pay the politician who is backing him in cash.
[Guest]: Why does he need a politician?
[Guest]: He needs a politician because our real estate regulations,
[Guest]: you know, across states are so complicated
[Guest]: that anyone who does not have the blessings of the local politician
[Guest]: and the local bureaucrats would not be in real estate business in the first place.
[Guest]: Now, this also explains to a large extent as to why we do not have,
[Guest]: you know, a pan-India real estate company, if you were to look at it.
[Guest]: In fact, we don't even have a pan-Mumbai real estate company.
[Guest]: There are, you know, players who concentrate in different pockets of the city,
[Guest]: which explains to you, you know, many things.
[Guest]: So, again, so the question is, why does the politician need money in cash?
[Guest]: The politician, obviously, you know, one is because he is corrupt.
[Guest]: He also needs money in cash because he has to fight an election every five years.
[Guest]: And elections in India now have become very, very expensive.
[Guest]: In fact, some time back, I was talking to, you know, a pollster
[Guest]: and he was telling me that even municipal level elections,
[Guest]: if you are serious about contesting a municipal level election in a big city in India,
[Guest]: it can cost you a few crores.
[Guest]: And you may not win the election, you know, at the end of the day.
[Guest]: There you go, my dreams of being a corporator. Vivek, what have you done?
[Guest]: So, you know, so the point I'm trying to make is,
[Guest]: so the politician needs cash to fight elections.
[Guest]: So, unless electoral funding is cleaned up, you know,
[Guest]: if we can clean up this entire process of electoral funding,
[Guest]: I mean, like in the US, the electoral funding is very, very open.
[Guest]: If in India we can have some sort of a system, you know, like the American system,
[Guest]: I mean, not that the American system is perfect.
[Guest]: They have, you know, there are problems there as well.
[Guest]: But at least it's clean and it's, you know, it's transparent.
[Guest]: So, if we can have some sort of a similar system,
[Guest]: then, you know, the electoral financing part gets cleaned up.
[Guest]: Now, once the electoral financing part starts to get cleaned up,
[Guest]: then, you know, your real estate guy suddenly does not need all the black money that he needs as of now.
[Guest]: Then the prices start to come down, then we create jobs.
[Guest]: But the point is that, you know, this is not like, you know,
[Guest]: a government taking a single decision and a solution emerging.
[Guest]: There are multiple decisions at multiple levels which need to be taken.
[Guest]: I mean, take the fact that, you know, take agriculture for that matter.
[Guest]: Now, as of now, if you have agriculture land,
[Guest]: I mean, you would have discussed it in your past podcast.
[Guest]: If you have agriculture land, you can only sell it as an agriculture land.
[Guest]: Now, the change in land usage depends on the local government.
[Guest]: And which is where they make all the money that they do, all the corrupt money that they do.
[Guest]: Where there is discretion, there is rent-seeking.
[Guest]: Where there is rent-seeking. So, these are the things, you know,
[Guest]: these are fundamental reforms that are needed.
[Guest]: And it's all, believe me, it's all connected.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, if these things are cleaned up, you know,
[Guest]: some amount of jobs will start to get created at least in construction.
[Guest]: If labor laws are cleaned up, you know, manufacturing can,
[Guest]: you know, small manufacturers can hope of, you know, becoming a little bigger.
[Guest]: And there is enough research, you know, globally which shows that jobs are created.
[Guest]: Big companies don't create jobs. Jobs are created when small companies become bigger.
[Amit Varma]: And simultaneously, as I spoke about in previous episodes with other guests,
[Amit Varma]: you know, in our service industry, jobs are actually going because of artificial intelligence.
[Amit Varma]: Even in manufacturing, there is a limit to how many new jobs can now spring up because of automation.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, all of these decades, we had these terrible labor laws and terrible regulations
[Amit Varma]: which kind of crippled the manufacturing industry.
[Amit Varma]: But even if they were all to be removed overnight, we might just have missed the bus.
[Guest]: We might have missed the bus. But the point is, you know, what else can you really do?
[Amit Varma]: What else can you really do?
[Amit Varma]: It's pretty depressing when you look at the causes of, you know, our shortfall in jobs
[Amit Varma]: because it starts right from education because you have, you know, a top-down command and control kind of system
[Amit Varma]: where market inputs don't really dictate what kind of schools we have and what kind of education people get,
[Amit Varma]: which leads to a lot of underqualified or non-qualified people emerging into the workforce.
[Amit Varma]: And they don't have jobs because the manufacturing industry has been stymied
[Amit Varma]: with these terrible labor laws and regulations and so on.
[Amit Varma]: Plus, there is a whole mess of what you described as happening in real estate.
[Amit Varma]: Plus, you have tens of millions of people in this country literally trapped in agriculture
[Amit Varma]: because they're not allowed to get out. It's just very messy.
[Amit Varma]: So, tell me, in the years to come, like one of my friends has expressed this fear to me in the past
[Amit Varma]: that we only have 20 years to sort things out because after that, instead of getting younger as we are now,
[Amit Varma]: we start getting older and people start moving out of the workforce.
[Amit Varma]: And if we don't fix it by then, we are in for, A, a disaster and B, a lot of social unrest.
[Guest]: Which is, you know, social unrest has already started. I mean, it's happening.
[Guest]: I mean, it's not very in the face right now, but it's there.
[Guest]: Now, whether that will turn into something like an Arab Spring is something that one cannot speculate about.
[Guest]: But the funny thing is, you know, I mean, as we were discussing before the podcast,
[Guest]: the official rate of unemployment in India is just 5%.
[Guest]: Yeah, why is that? I don't get it.
[Guest]: So, it's the way you calculate unemployment, basically.
[Guest]: So, there are two methods and in the first method, you know,
[Guest]: if you are employed for 183 or more days during the course of the year,
[Guest]: you are considered to be employed.
[Guest]: So, you can be unemployed for 182 days in a year and you would still be considered to be employed.
[Guest]: So, as per this method, the rate of unemployment is 5%.
[Guest]: Then we have another method which is even more interesting,
[Guest]: which basically sees that have you been employed for the last 30 days.
[Guest]: You know, whenever the survey happens, they check this.
[Guest]: So, if you have been employed for the last 30 days, you are considered to be employed.
[Guest]: As per this method, the rate of unemployment is 3.7%.
[Guest]: But then, you know, even though these data points mislead,
[Guest]: there is another data point that the government puts out,
[Guest]: which tells you the real state of unemployment in India,
[Guest]: is that only 60% of, a little more than 60% of people who look for jobs
[Guest]: during the course of the year, I mean 12 months of the year are able to find jobs.
[Guest]: In case of rural India, this number is even lower at 52%.
[Guest]: So, only 52% of rural India has a job all through the year.
[Guest]: So, this tells you the real problem of unemployment in India.
[Guest]: So, what we have is not unemployment, but underemployment.
[Guest]: You know, everybody is doing something,
[Guest]: but then that something is really not productive enough.
[Amit Varma]: This is a very scary story you have laid out Vivek
[Amit Varma]: and it just reminds me of how privileged both of us are.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for coming on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks Amit for having me.
[Amit Varma]: And then I said, you want jobs?
[Amit Varma]: I can give you jobs.
[Amit Varma]: I can give you anything.
[Amit Varma]: I am God.
[Amit Varma]: Jobs, come out and say hello to these wonderful people.
[Unknown]: And as I said this, Steve Jobs stepped out from behind me.
[Amit Varma]: He profiles LGBT people from all across the country
[Amit Varma]: and some of the stories are really poignant.
[Unknown]: You can download it on any podcasting network.
[Unknown]: Thank you.